Okay.
Hello, everyone.
I'm Natalie.
I'm an investor at Bain Capital Crypto, where
we focus primarily on open protocols and cryptography.
And we are actually investors in Blue Sky, as well as
a couple other projects in the ecosystem.
But I also come here as someone who's just an internet
native and has been publishing original content, music, writing on
the internet for a while.
And I spend most of my time in my investing capacity,
thinking about new media and new business models.
And so what I want to talk about here today is,
you know, I think most people here, we share a
lot of values when it comes to, you know, why
we're here and what we think is important about this.
But I think that for better or worse, I think when
it comes to winning the masses, I do think that we
generally speaking have to sort of win on economics and not just
values.
And so I think one of the most important and interesting sort
of open questions in this world right now is like, what
are the sort of economic primitives or substrates or questions
that we should be thinking about when it comes to how we
actually manifest the world that I think a lot of us here
are interested in seeing come to fruition.
So maybe just to start off with something very basic.
You know, when I talk about sovereign media, when we
talk about sovereign media, what exactly are we talking about?
And I think for me, it's sort of very basically
, not necessarily a format, but really a paradigm that is
about people having the capacity to own the means of their own
cultural production, which I think is specifically about, you know
, do you have control over how your content is produced?
Do you have control over how your content is distributed?
And do you have control over how your content is monetized
?
And I have this caveat here at the end, about without
sacrificing access to scale, because I think historically, when you
look at, you know, go back as far as you
want to, I think the kind of Faustian bargain
that underlies the media economy has been for a long time
that if you're a creator, you know, you will
trade some amount of agency, some amount of creative control for
access to scale.
You know, for me personally, if I had to pick
somewhere to fall on here, I think I'd probably want
to fall on the patronage model.
Honestly, I think that comes with a lot of great benefits
.
But, you know, I think generally speaking, this is
kind of the, the bargain that people have in the world
.
And I think that, you know, I think, you
know, I think that there's a lot of great benefits
.
And I think that's kind of a lot of great benefits
But, you know, I think generally speaking, this is
kind of the, the bargain that people have in the world
.
And I think that there's a lot of great benefits.
But, you know, I think generally speaking, this is
kind of the, the, the bargain that people have in
the world.
And I think that there's a lot of great benefits.
But, you know, I think generally speaking, this is
kind of the, the, the bargain that people have in
the world.
The bargain that people find themselves in.
And I don't want to, you know, make this
sound like it's inherently evil all the time.
I think there are better and worse places to kind of fall
on the spectrum.
But I think it's important to kind of, I think
this is a useful sort of mental model to keep in mind
.
And obviously, there's some good examples of this.
Like, I think for most people here, like a Google
search where it's like, you know, if you make
yourself illegible to us, you let us index you,
you know, we'll, we'll send you viewers,
right?
So, obviously, there are some trade offs that are associated
with that.
You know, the scale requires standardization.
Standardization requires legibility.
And legibility really constrains what gets made.
And I think the thing that I kind of wanted to double
click on here is that I think, you know, a
lot of times, again, people here who are in these
spaces share certain values.
And we think privacy is important.
But I think it's really important to understand or just to
keep in mind that, you know, a lot of times
the reason why people, you know, will give up their
privacy or will surveil themselves or allow themselves to be surve
illed is not just because they don't value those things,
but because they, there's a real economic cost to that
.
And a lot of times, you know, in our society
, in our intention economy, however you want to call it
, you know, legibility and economic value are very deeply
intertwined.
And so, oftentimes, when people want to, you know
, if people want to, you know, put privacy first
, that oftentimes associated with a real cost, a real economic
cost.
And so, I think the big point here is like,
thinking about this in terms of a problem that is systemic and
architectural and not something that is merely the consequence of bad choices
.
So, and I think another thing kind of related to that
that I think is important to remember is that, you know
, I think there's a lot of reasons that this is
important.
You know, obviously, we want creators to be paid.
Obviously, we don't want all of our communications infrastructure to
be owned by billionaires.
But I think the bigger point, at least for me,
that I think is important to keep in mind is that,
you know, there's a kind of incentive flywheel that
's at play here.
And I think the real scary thing and the real fundamental problem
that a lot of things like slop or surveillance are really symptoms
of is this idea that, you know, our incentives kind
of dictate what gets produced.
What gets produced dictates the quality of our information ecosystem,
which then dictate our ability to really coordinate and sense make as
a society.
And so, I think the real reason why we want the
economic incentives that underlie our cultural production to be aligned is
because it's really a societal epidemic.
problem even more than just a media problem, if you will
.
So, with all that context, I want to talk a
little bit about the role of technology, which is the world
that I come from.
And at least in the technology world, we often have this
sort of belief or assumption that when we, you know,
expand access to things, that that in and of itself is
sort of, you know, the winning recipe, if you
will.
And, you know, when I was personally spending time on
thinking about this question of, like, you know, why
do we not live in the sovereign media paradigm?
One thing that I really started to ruminate on,
well, is, you know, why hasn't democratized
access to the means of cultural production led to a sovereign media
paradigm?
And what do I mean by that?
What I mean by that is if you kind of look at
, let's call it, you know, modern attention economy
that I would date going back to roughly the 1830s
with the rise of the penny press, what you see is
this sort of secular trend of the main inputs coming down.
The cost of production, the cost of distribution has actually been
coming down in a fairly secular way for centuries.
And yet the market structure during that time has become as centralized
as ever.
And so I think, you know, that can be a
hard thing to see if we don't sort of zoom out
.
But I think there's a real sort of almost narrative violation
there around how is it that at the same time that access
to what we would call, you know, owning your means
of production has dropped so much.
How is it in that same time that the market structure and
the economic value has become so unbelievably centralized?
And I think a good way to think about this is that
, you know, Facebook and Google simultaneously, you know,
represent the most accessible platforms in a lot of ways.
They are they're offering us in some ways free distribution and
free production.
But at the same time, they represent a complete consolidation and
vertical integration of the market structure.
And just to kind of give you an example by what I
mean by that, you know, if you go back to
like the TV era, for example, there was a lot
of consolidation then.
But there was a real market structure in the sense that you
had distributors, you have producers, you had ad exchanges
, you had people who did measurement of audience of audience engagement
and things like that.
And then if you think about something like Facebook, they are
completely vertically integrated across all of those things.
They do the measurement, they're the ad exchange, they
're the distributor, they're now with AI, they're
the producer as well.
And so there's this kind of strange bifurcation
that is, I think, hard to see.
And it's often obscured by the fact that these companies
are offering us free products and services and they're giving us
, you know, so much free distribution.
It's like, how could that possibly be a problem?
And so I think, at least for me, there's
kind of two lessons that I think I've taken away from
that.
One is this idea that access and economic value seem to operate
really at different levels.
Access kind of operates at the layer where the costs are collapsed
, right?
So when the internet, you know, brings the cost of
distribution down to zero, now we can all have access to
that.
But economic value consolidates at the new scarcity layer.
So the moment that that happens, actually the most valuable thing
to do is become the aggregator and become the curator.
And so there's this weird bifurcation that happens
there where just at the moment that you get access to the
thing, the economic value has in some way been stripped out
of it.
And I think the second kind of related point to that is
that scale creates new coordination problems.
And so, you know, just because access scales, when
access scales but trust does not, that gap is where platform
modes and economics live.
And so, I think in some way, at least for
me, I think one of the lessons I've taken away
from this is that trust is really the thing that we have
to scale, I think, in some ways to start to
break out of this sort of Faustian bargain that I
think we've kind of been stuck in for a long time
.
So, I think, you know, takeaway, technology has
democratized access in very important and I think very straightforward ways
.
But it has not democratized economic value in the same ways
or to the same degree.
And I think that's kind of a, you know,
at least for people in my industry, generally a bit of
a hard pill to swallow because we like to think that access
and value are sort of coupled in ways that they may not
be.
So, I want to bring this all to the kind of
current moment and talk about AI, which I'm sure is
everyone's favorite topic.
And I think the useful way for me that I like to
think about AI is that it sort of breaks the existing covenant
, right?
So, in a world of omnipresent AI, we
fall into a situation where your agency can no longer reliably be
traded for access to the economic benefits of scale.
And I think, you know, going back to the Google
example is kind of a perfect one because, you know,
you used to, you know, make your content legible
to Google, let them index it, and you would have
faith that they would send you some amount of viewership.
Now, with AI, you think of ChatGPT
as a kind of layer that sits on top of that.
And so you're seeing these crazy numbers about how the impression
to viewership ratios are changing because, you know, A
Is are pinging people's websites thousands and thousands of times
and sending fewer and fewer viewers.
And so if you are someone who is taking the time to
really produce high-quality content, high-quality information,
high-quality cultural production, you find yourself in this weird
space where, in a lot of ways, you're no
longer economically incentivized to actually put that out on the open
web.
It's actually becoming economically rational for you to pay all that
, for you to put it in private silos.
And for many cases, people are just actually taking it offline
entirely.
And I mentioned at the end of this presentation that there's
-- I'm noticing, at least in my world, a
rise in physical media publications where people are almost going back to
not just physical books but physical magazines where they actually are skipping
the whole -- they want their distribution to basically be offline in
many ways so that the AI can't scrape it or train
on it or whatever the case may be.
And I think Cloudflare, who's a sponsor of
this conference, their CEO has been really loud over the last
year about this dynamic and has actually been trying to offer some
services to creators that allow them to pay all their content to
AI agents.
But I think, you know, there are also challenges with
that -- with that setup for many reasons.
So I think the challenge with this is that it's creating
this kind of a legible web, if you will,
which is what I was just speaking about, where people are
incentivized if you are -- the more kind of care and
quality that you're putting into your work in a certain way
, the more incentivized you are to sort of, you
know, keep it closed off, keep it paywalled
, keep it, you know, siloed.
And so it's -- I think the outcome of that,
if you play that out long enough, is that all the
good stuff is basically hidden, paywalled and available.
And the open free web is largely just kind of, you
know, various forms and flavors of AI slot, which I
think to some degree we are already feeling that and living in
that a little bit.
So, you know, these are some kind of somewhat funny
tweets that I saw that I think kind of capture this sentiment
in the zeitgeist in different ways.
But I think, you know, this is kind of where
we are, quite frankly, in the current moment.
So, you know, the opportunity for app protocol.
Where does app protocol fit into something like this?
And I think, for me, having -- you know,
using this framing, I think the most interesting and important thing
about open web protocols and cryptography, in a lot of
ways, is that they ease this tension between scale and agency
.
Where you don't, in the same way, have to
-- getting access to scale does not require the same sacrificing of
agency in the same ways.
And so, you know, this is kind of a sort
of a funny thing, but I do mean it seriously,
where I think that part of what we're seeing here is
a -- part of what we're seeing here is a return
to gatekeeping in a certain sense.
That's where people are -- people are wanting to not be
forced into one sort of mode or the other.
And they want to be able to play around the design space
that allows you to have some amount of scale and some amount
of agency.
And I think, you know, there are some examples I
talk about towards the end of this presentation.
But I think even just as a basic one that people here
are familiar with, you know, I used to think about
something like a black sky, where, you know, you
have a place for your community that is, you know,
for you and is specialized.
But that doesn't in any way preclude you from being
, you know, very deeply tapped into and integrated with a
wider, more scaled web and more scaled experience.
And so I think, you know, open enough to scale
, close enough to actually mean something is a good way to
think about, you know, where I think a lot of
people increasingly want to fall here.
And I think some of this is not even just an economics
thing.
I think increasingly I was joking with a friend the other day
that being famous is not really fun anymore because it intrinsically
comes with so much, you know, to be exposed like
that in the open web, you expose yourself to so much
harassment and so much negativity that I think people are finding --
it's getting to a point where some people wonder, like
, is it worth me even being online?
Is it worth me even, you know, trying to maintain
this public presence in the same way?
It feels like it really takes a toll on people in a
lot of ways.
And so, you know, I think in a lot of
ways, at least in my personal opinion, the successful outcomes
and what types of things will be interesting to build here will
look a lot more like guilds and collectives than traditional
startups.
And so I love the previous speaker who was just here because
, you know, what he was speaking about in a lot
of ways is exactly this, just kind of for the journalism
era where you have all these different sorts of new ways of
, you know, coordinating with people and forming new types of
-- basically new types of institutions in a lot of ways to
serve your community.
And, yeah, I think thinking about it in terms of
new institutions is really a useful way to think about it.
But I think, you know, it's funny for me
as a VC because I think a lot of this stuff will
and even goes for us to say should be eligible to venture
capital in a lot of ways.
I think these sorts of entities will be -- the economic subst
rates that they will have to exist in will be different.
And I think the funding structures, it goes all the way
down to that.
And so I think just to kind of post to the audience
, I think a good -- a useful question to ask is
kind of like, where are people already experimenting with high-
quality culture production?
And where's infrastructure for that missing?
And at least for me, I think I have a couple
examples that I'll share with you guys that I think are
interesting experiments that are also being run.
Obviously, I think there's been a lot of talk here
at AppRoto already about the research and science communities.
And I think that's a great and really, really,
really interesting space to spend time in.
And I don't know how many people here are familiar specifically
with the biohacking peptide community, but there are
communities of people who are now sort of doing scientific experiments on
themselves.
They're sharing health protocols, and it's this weird sort
of thing where it's almost like this new kind of scientific
or research institution.
And you can imagine that there's a certain level of infrastructure
that will be needed for that, whether it's verifying
that or testing to certain protocols that you've taken or that
you haven't taken.
Or people being able to trust, obviously, in a context
where you're essentially giving people medical advice in a lot of
cases.
But you can imagine that that will need more infrastructure, especially
in the case of verification, than just your run of the
mill social media platform.
I think a lot of the work that's being done by
the Blue Sky team with permission data is incredible because that's
exactly the kind of architectural primitives that we will need to
open up this design space a lot more.
And I'm incredibly, incredibly excited about that.
There's also this idea of community computing.
I don't know how many people here are familiar with the
dark forest operating system.
I honestly wish this project was built on top of that protocol
.
I'm kind of sold to that it's not.
But this is essentially like community operating spaces.
And so you can sort of create a, a lot of
them have, they have, you know, sort of like
mini wallets and banks inside.
They have sort of community apps.
And you can really think about it as a kind of like
community computer.
And these are sort of meant to be, again, like
they're not closed off in the sense of like, you
know, they're super, super private, but they are
closed.
They are secluded from the wider web in sort of important
ways.
And then obviously, you know, cultural collectives like Black
Sky and many of the other groups like that, that people
will be familiar with.
And so kind of close out here, I think just maybe
the short way of putting this whole talk is that, you
know, the economic medium is the message.
And so I think, I think, you know, as
we kind of continue to grapple with, you know,
what, what, what, what is this new paradigm going
to look like?
I think it's important for us to kind of keep in
mind that as the primitives and the architecture changes, the
economics will have to change as much.
And so, you know, even though there's always going
to be a bit of a, a tendency to think back
on, you know, how can we do ads or how
can we do, you know, these things or that things
, you know, we will have to kind of a little
bit suspend our imagination here and understand that the, the,
the economic primitives that make sense are going to be really
native to the form factors in a lot of ways.
And I think that's, you know, that's,
that's probably the, the main point that I wanted to
make here.
So thank you guys so much.
That's all I have for you.
And I'm happy to take any questions if, if anyone
has any.
Excellent.
Thank you very much.
There's a lot of chat happening on the stream.
So I just want to acknowledge everybody that's tuning in right
now.
So we have a few minutes for questions here.
Anybody have anything they want to ask Natalie?
Oh, oh, oh, oh, great.
Here we go.
Thank you for the talk.
Love those ideas you're presenting.
So one, I was interested in how you thought about the
role of curation, because I feel like that sort of
overlaps the scale, agency, economics, gatekeeping,
a word you use.
Like, do you see gatekeeping as similar to curation
?
Is there overlap there?
I think so.
I think it's more like a localized curation is the
way I would think about it, where, you know,
a lot of these platforms right now are kind of built on
a, a more global curation where it's, you
know, it's the, it's the, it's
the algorithm that's amassing, you know, all this
, all these sorts of things.
And it's, and it's, and it's not
the way in which content is being curated is, I guess
it's personalized, but it isn't, it isn't
attuned to the local context of a particular community.
And it's not the way that's curated by people that
's curated by people that's curated by people who are knowledgeable
about that particular topic.
It's just kind of this flattened global experience.
And so I think part of what I'm trying to get
at there is that, especially with the gatekeeping and like
the guilds is that that role, which is itself economically
valuable, should in some ways be returned to the context in
which they are economically valuable.
And in which people have, you know, real understanding and
of what that should be and can, you know, be
in conversation and governance and all those sorts of things about how
to actually do that in a way that makes sense.
Just to tap, tap in on that, in your,
you know, you're looking at a lot of different startups
and all, you know, across the space.
What are you seeing in terms of how AI is like a
new metal layer for curation, you know, between all
the content and then the humans that are, that have the
tastes, that have the capability to curate for their communities
?
Yeah, I think truthfully, I've been a little
bit, I've been a little bit disappointed or I feel
like I haven't seen, I haven't seen, I
think, I think that space is promising because AI is interesting
and that you can wield that scale in terms of personal agency
.
But I guess it's kind of the way you're framing
it, but I haven't seen anything yet that I feel
like really hits the nail there.
I think part of what I'm sort of gesturing towards
with this talk is that curation is in a lot of
ways a very human and context dependent job.
It is, it is very, it's economically valuable in
that sense.
And that I think, you know, part of what,
part of what will restore our sense of community and like ability
to engage in meaning making online is that that function gets returned
to human beings to some degree.
I think, you know, obviously we can't sift
through all the millions and millions of content.
But I do think that, I do think that before we
can talk more about kind of how the role that AI plays
in that, I do think there's the more pressing conversation
is restoring that functionality to humans a little bit is the way
I would think about it.
Thank you.
Right in the back here.
Yeah.
So on the topic of guilds and collectives as like
kind of the new formation, how do you think about those
kinds of structures getting the right capital formation together?
Because one of the things that I've observed on my startup
journey is that a lot of times VCs are pattern matching
and looking for more traditional two founders owning the vast majority of
the company, when a guild and collective has like all this
, you know, kind of governance complexity.
Yeah, great question.
I mean, the first part of that question is, I
think that's, that's a good, that's a
good example of why I think VC is a hard and not
ideal funding route for a lot of this stuff.
Because venture, venture masters simply requires scale at a certain point
.
And so if you are not angling for that, it
will distort your incentives in exactly the kind of the ways that
I was getting towards at the beginning of the presentation.
So maybe that's one point.
I think maybe a secondary point is, I think we're
, we're kind of back to maybe the person who was
presenting before me, we're kind of in the midst of
that experiment now where people are, you know, trying to
, you know, make new formations and explore, you know
, philanthropy or, you know, having a more direct relationship
with those who, those who consume your content.
But I do, I do think that remains a little bit
, I think, I think that remains a little bit of
an open question in the sense that I don't have like
a specific primitive to give you.
But I do think that for most things, the, the
, what ends up, what ends up being the kind of
economic mechanism that sustains you will be very native and specific
to how you actually generate value in your community.
Right.
So like journalism is monetized and it's valued differently than
like visual media, for example.
And so I wouldn't expect a guild that is built around
the production of journalism or to have the same business model or
funding structure as a guild that's built around, you know
, the production of, you know, paintings, for example
.
I don't know, just to take something else, I
think, and maybe that's part of my point is that
, you know, I think the business models have to be
more, more local and more form specific, I think is
part of what's happening here.
What are your thoughts on micropayments?
Do you see any viable future for that as a means of
supporting creative output?
I'm, I, the verdict is still out for me
on that.
You know, for example, like Cloudflare is,
Cloudflare's model, as I understand it, involves
some sort of micropayments where the idea is that
you will paywall your content to AI agents and they will
do a micropayment.
Quite frankly, in the crypto space, there's a lot
of hype around that right now, and I'm not closed
off to it, but I guess I just, I haven
't seen it play out yet.
And I'm also sensitive to the fact that, you know
, creators have bottom lines.
And so, you know, I think for a lot of
people, at least in my personal experience, a lot of
people, even though it's not perfect, would prefer a
kind of a sub stack model to a micropayment
.
You know, I think recurring revenue is something that creators are
very interested in.
And so, you know, I'm, I'm not
closed off to it, but I haven't seen a formulation
of it yet that feels like it's really deeply sustainable,
I guess.
Yeah, just to follow up on that.
So in London at Protocols for Publishers just last
month, micropayments was a topic that came up
as it comes up every time we gather together people, you
know, and there's a lot of research that has gone
back and looked at micropayments over the last 15
, 20 years.
Night Media Forum also hosted a bunch of people talking about that
just recently as well.
But there's like two things I want to raise at that
point.
One is speed, the very simple way to be able to
like tap to pay.
Like one of the challenges that we have right now on the
open web is that it is not easy without installing an extra
, you know, a plugin or something like a wallet and
all of this type of stuff.
And so that's, that's a challenge.
It has to be much smoother, just like going on the
subway and just like tapping to go through like tap to pay
, we have to get to that smooth UX.
Another thing is, is in the media world, a lot
of, it isn't just a matter of how much a
person paid.
So like when an article comes up and a paywall comes
up and that article has like a certain value attached to it
for advertising revenue.
And the idea is like, Oh, great.
If you just like for people that are not subscribing and they
just micropayment, you just collect enough microp
ayments, very tiny little micropayments to be
able to get that advertising equivalent to that advertising value.
You're fine.
Right.
But that's not actually how the economics of a lot of
these large newspapers work.
They package their audiences and sell that information and data and like
open that up on a different market.
There's a lot going on behind the scenes that that is
not accounting for.
And that's also a challenge.
So even if you'd have to really, it's not
just a sense of like, can we hit the, like
the 30 cents, you know, it's actually a lot
more than that.
So that's another challenge.
Yeah.
Hi.
Uh, there was mention of bifurcations,
uh, in reference to what I was, uh, considering
more, maybe, uh, I was thinking more of the
term partition, but like with bifurcation, I
imagine like a splitting into, uh, two modes of behavior
.
Uh, also with regard to the partition, uh, I
guess I also noticed it in the political sphere, uh,
as most evident in like Epstein's email with, uh
, Peter Thiel, where he said Brexit was just the
beginning and that like, there was like, uh, uh
, return to tribalism and a shift away from globalization,
which I guess spans more than just the media ecosystem, the
political and cultural aspects as well.
But I was thinking of partitions cause like people are,
uh, yeah, separating from each other, I guess.
So was there, uh, by, uh, multiple modes
of behavior that you were referencing with bifurcation?
Yeah.
So the, what I, what I really meant by the
bifurcation was that I, I think that the
, the, the, the, it's kind of like
the, the, the dynamics of the open web sort of
increasingly being incentivized to kind of be, you know,
the freely accessible, like lower quality, lower brow kind of
more sloppish stuff.
And then the, the, the part on the other side
of the partition, if you will, is, you know
, all of the more higher quality, more private, more
, more, you know, intimate, if you will,
more, uh, more local stuff where people feel at least
right now that, that people are scared.
People are scared.
I think to put their, to, to put the stuff
that they really deeply labor over, you know, in the
open web sometimes because you're willing to get trained on,
you know, where we don't, we don't know
, uh, sort of, it's more nebulous
how you can capture the economic value.
Once you've done that, especially in the world where everyone
's clawed by is crawling the internet at all times.
And so that's kind of what I was speaking of.
And, and, you know, this kind of like that
sort of a bifurcation between the illegible web
, as I call it, and the more legible web
.
Excellent.
All right.
Well, I think we should close off there and give us
a minute or two to transition to the next session.
But thank you very much, Natalie, for your analysis.